README.md, before:

# mpticks

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/derat/mpticks.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/derat/mpticks)

## Background

This is a web app for importing and visualizing ticks (i.e. personal history)
from [Mountain Project], a popular website that collects user-supplied
information about rock climbing areas.

Mountain Project's user pages display pitches/routes/days-out over different
periods of time, implying that users are expected to tick all their climbs
(including when repeated routes). However, doing so ends up cluttering per-route
tick lists with the same names over and over and with users' personal notes.

There are many different opinions about how ticks should be used:

*   [Suggestion: Private Ticks Option]
*   [Hiding tick list from profile]
*   [Ticks posted on mountain project page]
*   [Tick Lists]

It doesn't look like a "private ticks" feature is going to be added to Mountain
Project anytime soon, hence the existence of this app.

[Mountain Project]: https://www.mountainproject.com/
[Suggestion: Private Ticks Option]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/111808954/suggestion-private-ticks-option
[Hiding tick list from profile]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/113634433/hiding-tick-list-from-profile
[Ticks posted on mountain project page]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/107421753/ticks-posted-on-mountain-project-page
[Tick Lists]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/106511221/tick-lists

## Cloud Firestore data

### How ticks are stored

The obvious approach would be to store each tick in its own [Cloud Firestore]
document, and also store data about each route in its own document (either
per-user or globally). This would make it easy to add or delete ticks or query a
user's most-recent ticks.

The big downside to this is [Google's pricing model for Cloud Firestore]: the
free quota includes only 50,000 document reads, 20,000 writes, and 20,000
deletes per day. I assume that some users have thousands of ticks, and they
could consume the free quota quickly.

At the other extreme, each user could have a single document storing all their
ticks. Cloud Firestore documents are limited to a maximum size of 1 MB, so
there's a risk of running up against the limit if a user has many ticks. At the
same time, users with many ticks seem unlikely to also have extensive notes in
each, so it's conceivable that a document could store 10,000 ticks. There's
still the question of where route data would be stored with this approach,
though.

As a compromise, each route gets its own document, containing both data about
the route itself and all of the user's ticks for the route. Each area gets its
own document listing all of its routes, and there's also an "area map" document
that describes the area hierarchy so that it can be displayed with a single
document read.

This is unlikely to run up against document size constraints. It's not much
better than the "each tick in its own document" approach for users who don't
repeat routes yet still have thousands of ticks, but I'm hopeful that that will
be an uncommon scenario.

[Cloud Firestore]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore
[Google's pricing model for Cloud Firestore]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/quotas

### Schema

TypeScript interfaces for all Firestore documents are defined in
[src/models.ts](./src/models.ts).

#### `users` collection

User-specific information is stored in the `users` collection. Documents have
names corresponding to Firebase user IDs and correspond to the `User` interface:

*   `maxTickId`: Number field containing the maximum tick ID that has been
    imported.
*   `numRoutes`: Number field containing the number of routes that have been
    imported (and hence climbed).

#### `routes` subcollection

Per-route information is stored in the `routes` subcollection under each user
document. Documents have names corresponding to Mountain Project route IDs and
correspond to the `Route` interface:

*   `name` - String field containing the route's name.
*   `type` - Number field containing a `RouteType` enum value.
*   `location` - String array field containing the route's location, e.g.
    `['Colorado', 'Boulder', 'Boulder Canyon', 'Avalon']`.
*   `lat` - Number field containing the route's latitude.
*   `long` - Number field containing the route's longitude.
*   `grade` - String field containing the route's grade, e.g. `'5.9'`.
*   `pitches` - Number field containing the number of pitches.
*   `ticks` - Map field keyed by Mountain Project tick ID. Values are maps
    corresponding to the `Tick` interface:
    *   `date` - String field containing tick date as `YYYYMMDD`, e.g.
        `'20200101'`.
    *   `style` - Number field containing a `TickStyle` enum value.
    *   `pitches` - Number field containing climbed pitches.
    *   `notes` - String field containing user-supplied notes.
    *   `stars` - String field containing user-supplied score for the route: 1
        is 'bomb', 5 is 4-star.
    *   `grade` - String field containing user-supplied grade for the route,
        e.g. `'5.10a'`.

#### `areas` subcollection

Area-specific information is stored in the `areas` subcollection under each user
document. Documents have names corresponding to pipe-separated Mountain Project
locations (e.g. `Colorado|Boulder|Boulder Canyon|Avalon`) and correspond to the
`Area` interface:

*   `routes` - Map field keyed by route ID. Values are maps corresponding to the
    `RouteSummary` interface:
    *   `name`: String field containing the route name.
    *   `grade`: String field containing the route grade, e.g. `'5.10a'`.

A singleton document in the `areas` subcollection named `map` contains the full
area hierarchy and corresponds to the `AreaMap` interface:

*   `children` - Optional map field keyed by location component (e.g. `'Boulder
    Canyon'`) and with map values corresponding to the `AreaMap` interface.
*   `areaId` - Optional string field containing the area's document ID in the
    `areas` subcollection.

#### `stats` subcollection

Aggregate tick counts are stored in a `tickCounts` document in the `stats`
subcollection under each user document. The document corresponds to the
`TickCounts` interface:

*   `dates` - Map field keyed by date as `YYYYMMDD`.
*   `daysOfWeek` - Map field keyed by [ISO 8601 day of week] where `1` is Monday
    and `7` is Sunday.
*   `grades` - Map field keyed by route grade, e.g. `'5.9'` or `'V3'`.
*   `latLongs` - Map field keyed by comma-separated route latitude and longitude
    rounded to one decimal place of precision, e.g. `'39.9,-105.0'`.
*   `regions` - Map field keyed by route region (U.S. state/territory or
    country).
*   `routePitches` - Map field keyed by total pitches in route.
*   `routeTypes` - Map field keyed by `RouteType` enum values.
*   `tickPitches` - Map field keyed by climbed pitches.
*   `tickStyles` - Map field keyed by `TickStyle` enum values.
*   `topRoutes` - Map field keyed by pipe-separated Route ID and name, e.g.
    `'105924807|The Nose'`. Only a limited number of the most-climbed routes are
    present.

[ISO 8601 day of week]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_week_date

Commit message:

Write API ticks and routes to 'imports' subcollection.

README.md, after:

# mpticks

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/derat/mpticks.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/derat/mpticks)

## Background

This is a web app for importing and visualizing ticks (i.e. personal history)
from [Mountain Project], a popular website that collects user-supplied
information about rock climbing areas.

Mountain Project's user pages display pitches/routes/days-out over different
periods of time, implying that users are expected to tick all their climbs
(including when repeated routes). However, doing so ends up cluttering per-route
tick lists with the same names over and over and with users' personal notes.

There are many different opinions about how ticks should be used:

*   [Suggestion: Private Ticks Option]
*   [Hiding tick list from profile]
*   [Ticks posted on mountain project page]
*   [Tick Lists]

It doesn't look like a "private ticks" feature is going to be added to Mountain
Project anytime soon, hence the existence of this app.

[Mountain Project]: https://www.mountainproject.com/
[Suggestion: Private Ticks Option]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/111808954/suggestion-private-ticks-option
[Hiding tick list from profile]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/113634433/hiding-tick-list-from-profile
[Ticks posted on mountain project page]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/107421753/ticks-posted-on-mountain-project-page
[Tick Lists]: https://www.mountainproject.com/forum/topic/106511221/tick-lists

## Cloud Firestore data

### How ticks are stored

The obvious approach would be to store each tick in its own [Cloud Firestore]
document, and also store data about each route in its own document (either
per-user or globally). This would make it easy to add or delete ticks or query a
user's most-recent ticks.

The big downside to this is [Google's pricing model for Cloud Firestore]: the
free quota includes only 50,000 document reads, 20,000 writes, and 20,000
deletes per day. I assume that some users have thousands of ticks, and they
could consume the free quota quickly.

At the other extreme, each user could have a single document storing all their
ticks. Cloud Firestore documents are limited to a maximum size of 1 MB, so
there's a risk of running up against the limit if a user has many ticks. At the
same time, users with many ticks seem unlikely to also have extensive notes in
each, so it's conceivable that a document could store 10,000 ticks. There's
still the question of where route data would be stored with this approach,
though.

As a compromise, each route gets its own document, containing both data about
the route itself and all of the user's ticks for the route. Each area gets its
own document listing all of its routes, and there's also an "area map" document
that describes the area hierarchy so that it can be displayed with a single
document read.

This is unlikely to run up against document size constraints. It's not much
better than the "each tick in its own document" approach for users who don't
repeat routes yet still have thousands of ticks, but I'm hopeful that that will
be an uncommon scenario.

[Cloud Firestore]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore
[Google's pricing model for Cloud Firestore]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/quotas

### Schema

TypeScript interfaces for all Firestore documents are defined in
[src/models.ts](./src/models.ts).

#### `users` collection

User-specific information is stored in the `users` collection. Documents have
names corresponding to Firebase user IDs and correspond to the `User` interface:

*   `maxTickId`: Number field containing the maximum tick ID that has been
    imported.
*   `numRoutes`: Number field containing the number of routes that have been
    imported (and hence climbed).

#### `routes` subcollection

Per-route information is stored in the `routes` subcollection under each user
document. Documents have names corresponding to Mountain Project route IDs and
correspond to the `Route` interface:

*   `name` - String field containing the route's name.
*   `type` - Number field containing a `RouteType` enum value.
*   `location` - String array field containing the route's location, e.g.
    `['Colorado', 'Boulder', 'Boulder Canyon', 'Avalon']`.
*   `lat` - Number field containing the route's latitude.
*   `long` - Number field containing the route's longitude.
*   `grade` - String field containing the route's grade, e.g. `'5.9'`.
*   `pitches` - Number field containing the number of pitches.
*   `ticks` - Map field keyed by Mountain Project tick ID. Values are maps
    corresponding to the `Tick` interface:
    *   `date` - String field containing tick date as `YYYYMMDD`, e.g.
        `'20200101'`.
    *   `style` - Number field containing a `TickStyle` enum value.
    *   `pitches` - Number field containing climbed pitches.
    *   `notes` - String field containing user-supplied notes.
    *   `stars` - String field containing user-supplied score for the route: 1
        is 'bomb', 5 is 4-star.
    *   `grade` - String field containing user-supplied grade for the route,
        e.g. `'5.10a'`.

#### `areas` subcollection

Area-specific information is stored in the `areas` subcollection under each user
document. Documents have names corresponding to pipe-separated Mountain Project
locations (e.g. `Colorado|Boulder|Boulder Canyon|Avalon`) and correspond to the
`Area` interface:

*   `routes` - Map field keyed by route ID. Values are maps corresponding to the
    `RouteSummary` interface:
    *   `name`: String field containing the route name.
    *   `grade`: String field containing the route grade, e.g. `'5.10a'`.

A singleton document in the `areas` subcollection named `map` contains the full
area hierarchy and corresponds to the `AreaMap` interface:

*   `children` - Optional map field keyed by location component (e.g. `'Boulder
    Canyon'`) and with map values corresponding to the `AreaMap` interface.
*   `areaId` - Optional string field containing the area's document ID in the
    `areas` subcollection.

#### `stats` subcollection

Aggregate tick counts are stored in a `tickCounts` document in the `stats`
subcollection under each user document. The document corresponds to the
`TickCounts` interface:

*   `dates` - Map field keyed by date as `YYYYMMDD`.
*   `daysOfWeek` - Map field keyed by [ISO 8601 day of week] where `1` is Monday
    and `7` is Sunday.
*   `grades` - Map field keyed by route grade, e.g. `'5.9'` or `'V3'`.
*   `latLongs` - Map field keyed by comma-separated route latitude and longitude
    rounded to one decimal place of precision, e.g. `'39.9,-105.0'`.
*   `regions` - Map field keyed by route region (U.S. state/territory or
    country).
*   `routePitches` - Map field keyed by total pitches in route.
*   `routeTypes` - Map field keyed by `RouteType` enum values.
*   `tickPitches` - Map field keyed by climbed pitches.
*   `tickStyles` - Map field keyed by `TickStyle` enum values.
*   `topRoutes` - Map field keyed by pipe-separated Route ID and name, e.g.
    `'105924807|The Nose'`. Only a limited number of the most-climbed routes are
    present.

#### `imports` subcollection

Original imported Mountain Project data is stored in documents in the `imports`
subcollection under each user document. The documents correspond to the
`ImportedTicks` and `ImportedRoutes` interfaces, which just contain `ApiTicks`
and `ApiRoutes` objects. Documents are given names corresponding to the start
time of the import and suffixed by the data type and index, e.g.

*   `2020-02-09T13:34:03.195Z.routes.0`
*   `2020-02-09T13:34:03.195Z.ticks.0`
*   `2020-02-09T13:34:03.195Z.ticks.1`

[ISO 8601 day of week]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_week_date
